Welcome back guys. In this lesson we're going to be
talking all about the Shopify ajax API.
I'm currently on the official Shopify documentation,
I found this page just by searching for a Shopify ajax API and Google should be
the first result or one of the first results and this is
the page on the documentation for the Shopify ajax API.
It's pretty good, covers almost everything you can do with the ajax API.
There are a few hidden gems within Shopify.
Basically, the Shopify ajax API is mainly for adding items to the cart,
updating quantities in the cart,
basically doing anything with the cart without a page refresh,
as it says here, I've got an example here of a Shopify store running the impulse theme.
Impulse is a premium Shopify theme that is pretty modern.
I want you to have a look at what happens when I'm on this product page,
I select a variance and I click "Add to cart".
Here you can see that there's this side cart or side drawer that comes out with the cart,
and I can actually increase the quantity here and the price updates,
and I can decrease the quantity and I can set it to zero and now the cart is empty.
The whole time I'm doing this,
I'm not reloading the page.
As you can see from up here,
there is no new page being loaded,
it is simply opening up this drawer which is already on the page.
How is it doing this? It is doing this through the Shopify ajax API,
and I can prove it by opening up my developer tools,
over here in the Network tab,
I can see all the network requests.
Let's add an item to the cart and you'll see the first one that came up, add.js,
and you can see here the endpoint that is going to is cart/add.js,
and it's sending through,
a bunch of information.
Now you can see the response,
it's a bunch of cut information for this particular product variant.
You'll see here that we also have a get request to cart.js,
and you can see here that we've got the full cart here in this object.
We've got an array for items,
and you can go in and see that item that we just added,
so this is the Shopify ajax API in action.
This right here, is a Shopify ajax API endpoint,
and the reason I know that is because you can find it right here.
Here are the different end points,
and as you can see here,
if I make a get request to this path within a Shopify store,
I can use this to get the cart and it comes back in JSON format again.
Just a heads up,
this might be a little bit advanced for some viewers using APIs and what JSON is,
we did learn about JSON in a previous video,
but here we're actually sending requests to a server and returning
back objects in JSON form if we want to actually use them in our project,
we're going to have to parse these JSON objects.
This can be quite a long topic and you probably
need a bit of knowledge of JavaScript to get your head around this.
Again, this is not a JavaScript course,
this is all about Shopify,
so you should have some fundamentals in HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.
If not, I do have a class here on skillshed.com on JavaScript.
If you want to check that out or any other place you want to learn about it.
But this is what we're going to be doing,
we're going to be querying these endpoints and doing what is going on here.
Now unfortunately, I don't have the time to build
a side cart and all of this user interface in this one lesson,
what we're going to want to do is I'm going to show you the requests just in JavaScript,
and then I'm going to show you an example that I've
done up that I'll give you guys as well,
where I have rented a cart to the page and I'm able to update it,
take away items, update quantities right on the page.
I'll show an example of how you could actually implement
the UI and what's called the event listeners in the end of this video.
But first of all, what I want to do is I'm going to close this down,
I'm going to go back to my testing shop,
and I'm going to go into the new theme that we're working on.
Because we're going to be retrieving data purely through JavaScript,
I don't actually need to open my code editor,
I can actually just do it all through the console,
what I'm going to do is open up a product
that way we can actually add this product to the cart and then I'm going to
open up my Developer Tools and go to the Console
tab.Theme is going to be nicer to look at if we go down here,
and let's write our first request,
which is a basic one,
which is going to get the cart,
if you're starting on a blank project,
you should have an empty cart,
but you'll still get a cart object before we get started though,
it's going to make it a lot easier if we have something called jQuery installed,
if you don't know if jQuery is in your theme,
it's in a lot of themes,
you can write a basic jQuery command and see if it comes up undefined,
I've got undefined for the $ sign version of jQuery and I've got jQuery is not defined.
What I'm going to have to do is include jQuery in
my project.I will have to make one code modification just to bring in jQuery.
JQuery is a library that is just going to make it
easier for us to do these Ajax requests.
I'm going to type in jQuery into google and find a link to the CDN,
right here, and I can just grab the minified version of the latest version.
I'm going to copy that script tag,
go into my layout file,
and I'm just going to paste that in.
Hit "Save". Now if I refresh the page,
I can check if I have jQuery installed by doing the same command,
and now you can see I get a function back.
I can try the same thing with the jQuery keyword itself,
and I get the same thing.
There's no error saying what is jQuery,
so we know now we've got jQuery and now we have
a few nicer functions to do to get requests with.
The first one is a request to cut JS to get the cart,
so this is a very simple one.
I'm going to use the get function in jQuery,
and I'm going to put in as the first parameter, the end points,
which is simply /cart.js,
and then I'm going to put in my callback function.
What's going to happen here is I'm going to make a request to
this end point and then I'm going to access the data that comes back,
so what I'm going to do is console log
the data so we can see it right here in our console.
I'm not sure why I get this error here,
but as you can see,
I've got the data back.
The issue with it, however,
is that it's in one giant string,
so what I'm going to have to do is parse this,
because this is just a JSON string,
but we're easily able to what's called parse this,
and we'll get back a JavaScript object that we can work with.
Instead of just putting in data,
I'm going to wrap that in a parse,
and now you can see we get
a JavaScript object back that we can actually navigate and look inside.
Now it looks like I've already got an item in my cart,
and to verify that that's the correct information,
I'm actually just going to go to my cart page,
and I see, yes,
I've got three of these awesome sneakers in my cart.
Let's remove that product from my cart.
Cart is now empty,
let's go back to that product page,
any product page, and I'm going to rerun that "Command".
Now, you can see in our cart,
we've got item cart zero and we've got the array of items which is currently empty,
just as we would expect.
What's happening here is without having to go into our back-end code,
I'm able to retrieve the cart from our Shopify store all in the browser.
From a practical perspective,
this is what allows us to do things purely on the front end and in
Shopify the place where it makes
the most sense to have this functionality is with the cart.
Because the cart is the main point of interaction with your Shopify store.
People are browsing products most of the time,
they're looking at content.
The main interaction happens when the person is ready to purchase.
They put the item in the cart and then they turn
that cart into a checkout and complete their checkout.
It's no wonder that Shopify provides
this API for you to actually do stuff like this with your cart.
Let's run through the next one.
Let's actually, add an item to our cart.
I'm going to scroll up to the top and this is the one I'm looking for.
Use this to add a variant to the cart.
Remember, it's a variant that gets added to the cart, not the product.
What we're going to need to do is grab the variant selection from
this form and then submit it to the cart using this post request.
We can do this in two ways.
We can specify the variant ID and the quantity that we want to add to the cart.
But the problem with this is we don't yet know the variant until
a person puts in their selection and the variant is determined from this selection.
What we can do is instead serialize the form and what that's going to do is
take all the data of the form and it's going to come out as an object here for us.
Let's use that example right here.
I'm going to go back in here.
As long as we have a form on our page with
the action of cart slash add, this is going to work.
I'm going to hit "Enter" on that.
Now let's load the cart again, and see what happened.
If we open up our cart, we can now see the item count is one.
In our array we have an item,
and the item is the variance of our selection here.
I'm going to click this to clean this up a bit.
I want to run the add to cart Ajax requests
one more time and I want to have a look in
a network tab at what's actually happening here.
Remember, we serialized our form and we
send that data off to Shopify and you can see here,
what that's done is given us an object with
the ID of the variant we want to add and how many of them we want to add.
We don't necessarily need a product form if we're able to find
the variant through other means just as a FYI there.
We could actually, instead of serializing the form,
if we knew the variant ID for some other means,
we can just put in an object here with the variant ID,
copy it from here,
and then the quantity and then that will do the exact same thing.
If I clear the console and I run the get cart again,
you'll now see that we have three of these shoes now in our cart.
Just a few more things you can do with the Ajax API.
We can clear the cart.
We can make a post request to /cart /clear.js,
sets all quantities of all line items to zero,
so clears your cart.
Let's go back in here,
make a post request using jQuery and the endpoints
was cart clear and we don't need to send any more data with it,
so we can just write it like that.
Now, if we run get cart again,
you'll see our cart is completely empty.
The last thing you'll probably want to do with your cart using
the Ajax API is to update the quantity.
Here you can use the post request to the cart slash change endpoint,
and you can change the quantity of an item already in the cart.
What we're going to do is add a variant to the cart again.
Just copying and doing the same request again.
Now, I can create a post request to
this endpoint and put in an object just like I had before.
I can strip it off here and maybe I want to update the quantity to five.
Now, I can send that post request.
Let's clear the console and let's open up the cart.
I just added another one. Now, we should have
six is the one I'm looking for and as you can see,
we have six of this item.
We have just one line item because it's all the same variant,
but the quantity is six.
It's got all the information here about the variant.
Now, in line item form,
as you'll see on the cart.
Alright, cool. Those are the main things you would want to do with your cart.
In the example, we saw and the example,
I'll show you in a sec.
That's what we're using the Ajax API for.
The Shopify Ajax API makes it really easy using
these endpoints to retrieve data about your cart and modify your cart.
The real challenge comes from sending up
event listeners and handling that response to update your UI.
Unfortunately, that is a very JavaScript heavy lesson
and not particularly specific to Shopify.
That's why I'm just going to show you an example,
now and run through it,
but we're not going to code it from scratch in this lesson.
The reason why is,
it is general JavaScript knowledge of how to do this.
If you want to learn more about JavaScript, again,
I have a class on skill share,
or you can learn about JavaScript somewhere else.
This is just concerned with Shopify,
but I do want to give you an example of, what it would look like.
If I close down this preview and we head back into the store,
I've actually set up a theme with an example of a reactive cart.
Right here, I've got this theme called Ajax API Demo,
and its based off the new theme.
Basically, the only thing I've changed is I've added Bootstrap,
which is a CSS framework.
You'll see the styles are a little bit different and we've got these buttons,
styles right out the gate.
If I go into a product,
you can see that the cart is sitting right next to the product,
and if I add an item to the cart,
I don't need to go to the cart page to see my cart updating.
I can even change quantities and all the different parts of my cart will update.
As I said, usually you would have to go to the cart page and view it there.
But even from here,
you can't update quantities without having to reload the page.
In order to make a cart like the one we just saw,
so going back to the product template,
we must use JavaScript and the Ajax API.
Just to prove to you that this is using the Ajax API,
I'm going to open up my Developer Tools and I'm going to have a look in the Network tab.
The first thing I want to do is actually before we look in the Network tab,
I just want to clear the cart completely.
I'm going to clear this console as well.
Now, let's add an item to the cart.
As you can see, we've got a request to add.js.
If I look inside there,
we can see what we're sending is an ID and a quantity.
This is the data from the form.
What it's doing is actually serializing the form,
grabbing this data and then it's sending it to the Ajax API.
Actually before this, before we even add an item to the cut,
if I just refresh the page.
You'll see we're getting the cut from the Ajax API.
The reason why you can tell that is if we look in here,
we can see a get request to cart.js.
If I open that up,
I'm just going to have to move this across a little bit.You can see we
haven't sent anything because we're just asking to get to the cart,
we're not posting anything.
You'll see the response we get back is the whole cart as an object.
Remember we saw this before when we were just working in our console.
But the difference now is the page loading is actually triggering this.
Then what's happening is we're taking this data and we're representing it on the page.
Let's have a look at what happens when I add another item to the cart.
We make a request to add.js.
You can see here what we get back is a line item.
We don't get back the whole cart,
but we get back a line item,
and that gives us the necessary information to update our cart.
Now, if I increase the quantity,
you can see we're making a request to change.js,
which is another end point.
You can see here that change.js.
What we're doing is we're sending
the ID and we're sending through the quantity that we needed to change to.
What that will do is it'll take the data and then it will return the whole cart again.
You can see here, if we go look inside the item,
we can see quantity somewhere here.
There we go, it's three,
and then the total item count is three there.
If we added another line item,
so we just need to select a different variant,
add that to the cart.
Now you can see we add that line item and now we have all of its data here.
If I was to change the quantity on that,
look at the next request.
You'll see we have five items spread across two lines.
The first line has a quantity of two and the second line has a quantity of three,
for a total of five.
Then, you can see we've got the total price and everything.
I wanted to show you how the Ajax API is
working as well updating the user interface on the page.
Now, as I said before,
there are a few parts to this.
First of all, the event listeners.
Certain things happen on the page called events.
Then those events are set to trigger requests to the Ajax API.
Now, of course, when the data comes back,
we need to actually do something and then that something is updating our user interface.
Let's have a look at the code right now.
If I go back into this theme and I click Edit code,
there is quite a bit of code here,
and I'm not going to explain line by line.
But what I've done here is I've used a templating library code mustache, right her.
What that allows me to do is create these templates.
So this is the template for the whole cart.
This is the template for the line item.
If you want to learn more about mustache,
mustache.js is where you can learn more about it.
Logic list templates, you can read the manual here.
It's not the most sophisticated documentation,
but essentially you can think of mustache like a JavaScript version of liquid.
It actually uses the same delimiters,
which is why we need to actually change the delimiters
to custom ones so that they don't actually conflict.
So as you can see here in this template,
just like we would in liquid,
we would insert a URL like this.
But, of course, because we are in liquid and
the liquid engine is going to interpret that as liquid,
we need to use custom delimiters to
differentiate these template variables from the ones in liquid.
We've got the two templates right here and we've got a whole bunch of
JavaScript that includes our event listeners and then now Ajax API requests,
and then we handle the response.
We've also got some styles in here to style the cart.
As I said, I'm not gonna go through line
by line of this document because there's a lot going on here.
I have written extensive comments on all the different functions.
I would definitely have a read of this file,
and if you have any questions, let me know.
You can access this file through my GitHub page,
I have a repository called skillshare where you can
access resources for all my classes on skillshare.
Right here you can see product.liquid is one of those resources.
This one's actually a little bit nicer to look at because it
does syntax highlighting on these JavaScript templates.
But you'll need to actually move this into your theme in order
to actually interact with this code and see what it's doing.
One more thing before I step through the code a little bit,
is that you will need jQuery installed on your theme.
So if you don't have it already,
you'll need to either install it
by downloading it and including it in your assets folder.
Or the simple way is just to include a link via a script tag to the CDN.
So you can just, how I got this link,
was I went to jQuery,
jQuery CDN, and I found the URL.
So just like we did before when we were doing our requests in the console,
we need to actually include that script in our theme.liquid.
Or if it already exists, that's cool.
But there is some parts in here where we're using jQuery.
As I mentioned, we've got our two templates here.
Before that. We've got the product page as it normally appears.
So here's where our normal product template code is,
which I have over here.
We have a div here for the side cart.
Right here we've got this div with an ID of cart goes here.
The div of the cart goes here,
ID is what we use to tell mustache where to put the template.
When the page loads,
is going to load this template right here into this div.
Now, this other one line item is for when we add a new line item to the cart.
So it's a section of the cart.
What that's going do is it's going to append to a specific part of this template.
This is basically all just mockup with
the appropriate data placed in different parts of this mockup.
The real magic is right here.
So to go through this code in a similar fashion to what I showed you here.
Remember we had, so I'll just put that back to one,
refresh the page and you'll see that cart gets generated.
Now, if I refresh the page again,
you can see that this renders first and then this renders,
that's because this is rendered by liquid.
This is coming from the back-end and this is
actually being rendered on the front end using mustache.
So what does that is this function here, run get cart.
When the page loads,
that's when we run this get cart function/ if we look up here,
what get cart does is it sends a request to the AJax API to get the cart,
it passes that data,
and then it sends it to this function which handles the data.
I've done this handling of the data in a few different places,
which is why I moved that into a different function.
Then you can see the function up here.
What this does is it updates
the cart total and the items based on what comes back from the API,
the API has all the prices in sense,
what we need to do is divide them all by 100 in order to get the price in $,
and then we render the cart with mustache.
This is the mustache method in order to take our template,
take our data, and combine them together to create our output.
Then, as you can see here,
we're taking the element that has the ID of cart goes here,
and we're putting that mustache output right in there.
Okay, so that is what's happening when I first load the page.
It is making that Ajax request and then rendering that template using Mustache.
What about when I add a product to the cart?
So let's just choose this size nine variant and I click Add to cart.
Oh, we already have size nine,
so that's just going to increase the quantity.
If I go into here and I look at the submit Event Listener for add to cart,
we're doing a bunch of different things here where
preventing the form from doing a standard form submit,
so we can handle the form using JavaScript.
We're doing like we did before.
We're serializing the form so we can get its data.
Then we're passing it to the Ajax API for a post request.
We're going pass the response,
update the cart total.
Then we're going to get the response back from the server and handle that.
Remember the response for adding an item to the cart in the Ajax API is the item.
So it's not the whole cart like with cart.js or this one, cart/change.js.
The responses for those are the whole cart,
but the response for this particular request is the line item.
Because of that, the cart total,
we have to figure out ourselves because it's not coming back in the data.
So that's what I've done here.
It's pretty easy to figure out,
is this going to be the previous cart total plus whatever the price of that item is.
Then we actually need to go find it in the UI and update it,
dividing it by 100 in order to get it i $.
This right here, we'll check if the item already exists in the cut.
Remember we added another item of the same variant.
That means that we don't need a new line item,
we just need to update the quantity of that line item.
If I go in here and choose a different variant,
you'll see that we get a new line item.
That's what this conditional does.
It checks if a variant already exists.
You can see the function up here.
We return an array based on whether a match has been found.
If there is a match already,
then instead of running mustache to render a whole new line item,
we just have to update some things on the existing line item.
We just grab the item from the DOM using
this and then we update the quantity and the price.
Here you can see if I add another one,
the things that change are the quantity and the price here,
and of course, the total,
which we already have handled up here.
But if it's a whole new item,
what we're going to do is push that item into our items array.
We're going to take the data,
the prices and we're going to divide them by 100 again to get dollar values.
Then we're going to render the line item template.
Anytime we're rendering a whole new piece of HTML,
I've opted with going with mustache rather than doing jQuery.
If you're writing a whole lot of mark-up,
it helps to have a templating language.
But if you're only updating a few little things like a number here,
then you don't need to really worry.
The last one, which is the one I just did,
is updating the quantity.
If I go on any of these and I update the quantity,
if I set it back to zero,
as you can see here,
if the new quantity is less than one,
what I'm going to do is just hide that item right after the post request.
Stepping back a little bit,
what I'm going to do is set up event listeners here on these quantity adjustment buttons.
The "Plus" one is going to adjust the quantity by positive one.
The "Minus" button is going to adjust the quantity by negative one.
That's going to get passed into here along with the event,
and we are going to find the current quantity and variant ID of the item,
apply the adjustment to the current quantity to get a new quantity,
and then here we send the post request.
The reason why we need to find the quantity and
the variant ID is because these are what's required to send the API.
Then the response we get back is the whole cart,
so we can pause that and then if we are removing an item from the cart,
then we're just going to hide it,
and then we're going to update those variables.
If not, we're going to handle a completely new cart object.
It just makes it easier seeming we are getting the whole cart back from the API.
All we need to do is pass that data back into
this handle cart response and then it'll re-render the whole cart.
If I press this, we're re-rendering the whole cart with all the data.
As you can see, this amount is updating and this total is updating as well.
That's a lot of code and I'm using ES6 a lot here.
This is some advanced level stuff.
This is definitely not beginner stuff.
Definitely, don't worry if you don't fully understand this.
This requires quite a bit of JavaScript knowledge and
you'll need to know about ES6 syntax as well.
For instance, what I've done here with the arrow function,
the equivalent in traditional JavaScript is like that.
I'm using ES6 just because I think it looks nicer,
but maybe it's confusing to you.
Again, this is a bit of an advanced levels lesson.
The main thing I want you to take away from
this is what we learned here with the Ajax API.
I want you to understand that if we're creating carts that
do not require page reloads in order to update them,
then we're using the Ajax API.
Remember, anything that stays on the client side and involves programming,
gaining access to data from back ends,
if we're not reloading the page and making a new server request that way,
then we're using Ajax,
and the Ajax API and Shopify is how we're able to access that data.
That's the main thing I want to get across in this video.
This should open you up to new possibilities with Shopify,
but you may not be ready just yet in order to fully leverage this.
There is a lot of depth to JavaScript and the API.
But right here, I think is an example that really sums it up.
If you go, again,
check out the cart,
spend some time looking at it,
see if you can figure it out.
If not, work on your JavaScript skills.
If it's all too, don't worry.
You've always got your standard cart page.
Actually a lot of Shopify stores,
even some really big ones,
don't have a fully client-side cart.
There was one store I saw,
I was actually surprised that they didn't have
this when I was doing research for this class.
Luxy Hair is a really big Shopify store.
If we actually go to a product, here we are.
We've got this product here.
If I click "Add to Bag",
which is the equivalent of add to cart,
we get redirected to the cart page,
and if I remove an item,
the whole page reloads as well.
Even on a major Shopify website,
they aren't using a fully client-side cart.
It's not a huge deal if you're not ready to implement that yet.
A lot of themes already have that.
In terms of your Shopify theme programming knowledge,
it depends on how far you want to go with it.
But if you want to code your own client-side cart,
or you want to be able to manipulate a current theme with that feature within it,
then you'll need to know about this Ajax API and know JavaScript.
But it's not essential to create a successful store.
You can always use your cart page.
You don't have to necessarily have a client-side cart or a side cart that comes out.
This lesson, I think was a really big one,
but it is quite a big topic.
It's not a compulsory topic.
I don't think you can create a course on
Shopify theme programming without talking about this awesome feature and this API.
If you're interested, here's the documentation on the official website.
Check out my example code if you want to see my implementation.
But that is where I'll leave you on the Shopify Ajax API.
In the next lesson,
we're going to go back into Shopify liquid and
learn some more advanced patents within Shopify.
I'll see you on that one.